


Consciousness, computation and brain activities


2.1.  Unexplained features of consciousnessHow  does  the  brain  produce  consciousness?  Most  scientists  and  philosophers  view  consciousness  as  an  emer-gent property of complex computation among ‘integrate-and-fire’ brain neurons which interconnect and switch atchemically-mediated synapses. However the mechanism by which such neuronal computation may produce consciousexperience remains unknown[18,19]. Specific unexplained features of consciousness include the following:The ‘hard problem’Whatis the nature of phenomenal experience, and what distinguishes conscious from non-conscious cognition? Perception and behavior may be accompanied or driven by phenomenal conscious awareness,experience, or subjective feelings, composed of what philosophers call ‘qualia’[19]. However perception and be-havior may at other times be unaccompanied by consciousness. We could have evolved as full-time non-conscious‘zombies’ performing complex ‘auto-pilot’ behaviors without conscious awareness. How and why do we havephenomenal consciousness, an ‘inner life’ of subjective experience?
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7841‘Binding’Disparate sensory inputs are processed in different brain regions, at slightly different times, and yetare bound together into unified conscious content (‘binding’[20]). How is conscious content bound together?SynchronyNeuronalmembrane polarization states may be precisely synchronized over large regions of brain[21], and also propagate through brain regions as synchronized zones[22]. Does precise synchrony require elec-trical synapses (‘gap junctions’) and/or quantum entanglement? Does synchrony reflect discrete, unified consciousmoments?‘Non-computability’ and causal agencyAsshown by Gödel’s theorem, Penrose[23,24]described how the men-tal quality of ‘understanding’ cannot be encapsulated by any computational system and must derive from some‘non-computable’ effect. Moreover, the neurocomputational approach to volition, where algorithmic computationcompletely determines all thought processes, appears to preclude any possibility for independent causal agency,or free will. Something else is needed. What non-computable factor may occur in the brain?Cognitive behaviors of single cell organismsProtozoanslikePhysarumcan escape mazes and solve problems,andParameciumcan swim, find food and mates, learn, remember and have sex, all without synaptic connections[25,26]. How do single cells manifest intelligent behavior?2.2.  Conscious moments and computationConsciousness has often been argued to be a sequence of discrete moments. William James[27]described the“specious present, the short duration of which we are immediately and incessantly sensible” (though James was vagueabout duration, and also described a continual ‘stream of consciousness’). The “perceptual moment” theory of Stroud[28]described consciousness as a series of discrete events, like sequential frames of a movie (modern film and videopresent 24 to 72 frames per second, 24 to 72 Hertz, ‘Hz’). Consciousness is also seen as sequences of discrete eventsin Buddhism, trained meditators describing distinct “flickerings” in their experience of pure undifferentiated aware-ness[29]. Buddhist texts portray consciousness as “momentary collections of mental phenomena”, and as “distinct,unconnected and impermanent moments that perish as soon as they arise”. Buddhist writings even quantify the fre-quency of conscious moments. For example the Sarvaastivaadins[30]described 6,480,000 “moments” in 24 hours (anaverage of one “moment” per 13.3 ms, 75 Hz), and some Chinese Buddhists as one “thought” per 20 ms (50 Hz). Thebest measurable correlate of consciousness through modern science is gamma synchrony electro-encephalography(EEG),  30  to  90  Hz  coherent  neuronal  membrane  activities  occurring  across  various  synchronized  brain  regions.Slower periods, e.g. 4 to 7 Hz theta frequency, with nested gamma waves could correspond to saccades and visualgestalts[31,32](Fig. 11). Thus, we may argue that consciousness consists of discrete events at varying frequenciesoccurring across brain regions, for example 40 conscious moments per second, synchronized among neurons in frontaland parietal cortex. What are these conscious moments?The over-arching presumption in modern science and philosophy is that consciousness emerges from complexsynapticcomputation in networks of brain neurons acting as fundamental information units. In digital computers,discrete voltage levels represent information units (e.g. ‘bits’) in silicon logic gates. McCulloch and Pitts[33]pro-posed such gates as integrate-and-fire artificial neurons, leading to ‘perceptrons’[34]and other types of ‘artificialneural networks’ capable of learning and self-organized behavior. Similarly, according to the standard ‘Hodgkin–Huxley’[35]model, biological neurons are ‘integrate-and-fire’ threshold logic devices in which multiple brancheddendrites and a cell body (soma) receive and integrate synaptic inputs as membrane potentials (Fig. 1). According toHodgkin and Huxley, the integrated potential is then compared to a threshold potential at the axon hillock, or axoninitiation segment (AIS). When AIS threshold is reached by the integrated potential (Fig. 2), an all-or-none actionpotential ‘firing’, or ‘spike’ is triggered as output, conveyed along the axon to the next synapse. Cognitive networksof Hodgkin–Huxley neurons connected by variable strength synapses[36]can self-organize and learn, their axonalfiring outputs controlling downstream activity and behavior.How does consciousness arise from neurocomputation? Some contend that consciousness emerges from compu-tationalcomplexity due to firings and other brain electrical activity[37,38]. However neither the specific neuronalactivities contributing to complexity, nor any predicted complexity threshold for emergence of consciousness havebeen put forth. Nor is there a sense of how complexityper secould give rise to discrete conscious moments. Otherscontend large scale, cooperative axonal firing outputs, ‘volleys’, or ‘explosions’ produce consciousness[18,39].Butcoherent axonal firings are in all cases preceded and caused by synchronized dendritic/somatic integrations. Indeed,gamma synchrony EEG, the best correlate of consciousness, is generated not by axonal firings, but by dendritic and
42S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Fig. 1. An ‘integrate-and-fire’ brain neuron, and portions of other such neurons are shown schematically with internal microtubules. In dendritesand cell body/soma (left) involved in integration, microtubules are interrupted and of mixed polarity, interconnected by microtubule-associatedproteins (MAPs) in recursive networks (upper circle, right). Dendritic–somatic integration (with contribution from microtubule processes) cantrigger axonal firings to the next synapse. Microtubules in axons are unipolar and continuous. Gap junctions synchronize dendritic membranes, andmay enable entanglement and collective integration among microtubules in adjacent neurons (lower circle right). In Orch OR, microtubule quantumcomputations occur during dendritic/somatic integration, and the selected results regulate axonal firings which control behavior.somatic integration potentials. Accordingly, some suggest consciousness primarily involves neuronal dendrites andcell bodies/soma, i.e. in integration phases of ‘integrate-and-fire’ sequences[40–42]. Integration implies reduction ofuncertainty, merging and consolidating multiple possibilities to one, e.g. selecting conscious perceptions and actions.2.3.  Consciousness and dendritic integrationNeuronal integration is commonly approximated as linear summation of dendritic/somatic membrane potentials(Fig. 2a). However actual integration is not passive, actively involving complex processing[44–46]. Dendritic–somaticmembranes generate local field potentials (‘LFPs’) that give rise to the electro-encephalogram (EEG), including coher-ent gamma synchrony, the best measurable neural correlate of consciousness (‘NCC’[47,48]). Anesthetic moleculesselectively erase consciousness, acting on post-synaptic dendrites and soma, with little or no effects on axonal fir-ing capabilities. Arguably, dendritic/somatic integration is most closely related to consciousness, with axonal firingsserving to convey outputs of conscious (or non-conscious) processes to control behavior. But even complex, activeintegration in Hodgkin–Huxley neurons would, apart from an entirely probabilistic (random) input, be completelyalgorithmic and deterministic, leaving no apparent place for a free will aspect of consciousness.However neurons involved in conscious brain processes apparently deviate from Hodgkin–Huxley. Naundorf etal.[43]showed that firing threshold at the AIS in cortical neurons in brains of awake animals (compared to neuronsin  vitro)  vary  significantly  spike-to-spike  (Fig.  2b).  Some  factor  in  addition  to  inputs,  synaptic  strengths  and  theintegrated  AIS  membrane  potential  apparently  contributes  to  effective  integration  controlling  firing,  or  not  firing,ultimately influencing behavior. This unknown end-integration, pre-firing factor is perfectly positioned for consciousperception and action. What could it involve?One possible firing-modulating factor comes from lateral connections among neurons via gap junctions, or elec-tricalsynapses  (Fig.  1).  Gap  junctions  are  protein  complexes  which  fuse  adjacent  neurons  and  synchronize  their
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7843Fig. 2. Neuronal ‘integrate-and-fire’ behaviors. (a) The Hodgkin–Huxley model predicts integration by membrane potential in dendrites and somareach a specific, narrow threshold potential at the proximal axon, and fire with very limited temporal variability (smalltb−ta) for given inputs.(b)  Recordings  from  cortical  neurons  in  awake  animals[43]show  a  large  variability  in  effective  firing  threshold  and  timing.  Some  unknown‘x-factor’ (related to consciousness?) modulated integration to exert causal influence on firing and behavior.membrane polarization states, e.g. in gamma synchrony EEG[49–54]. Gap junction-connected cells have fused, syn-chronized membranes, and also continuous intracellular volumes, as open gap junctions between cells act like doorsbetween adjacent rooms. Neurons connected by dendritic–dendritic gap junctions have synchronized local field poten-tials in integration phases, but not necessarily synchronous axonal firing outputs. Gap junction-synchronized dendriticnetworks can thuscollectivelyintegrate inputs, enhancing computational capabilities[22]. However membrane-basedmodulations via gap junction connections would be reflected in the integrated membrane potential, and unable to ac-count for threshold variability seen by Naundorf et al.[43]. Finer scale processes from within neurons (and conveyedfrom interiors of adjacent neurons via open gap junctions)wouldalter firing threshold without changing membranepotentials, and could serve as a potential site and mechanism for consciousness.Finer scale intra-cellular processing, e.g. derived from cytoskeletal structures, are the means by which single-cellorganisms perform cognitive functions without synaptic inputs. Observing intelligent actions of unicellular creatures,famed neuroscientist Charles Sherrington[55]said in 1957: ‘of nerve there is no trace, but perhaps the cytoskeletonmight serve’. Neurons have a rich and uniquely organized cytoskeleton, the major components being microtubules,well-positioned and uniquely arrayed (e.g. in dendrites and soma) to mediate consciousness and regulate firing