
Discussion—consciousness in the universe

Section1 described three possibilities regarding the origin and place of consciousness in the universe: (A) as anemergent property of complex brain neuronal computation, (B) as spiritual quality of the universe, distinct from purelyphysical actions, and (C) as composed of discrete ‘proto-conscious’ events acting in accordance with physical lawsnot yet fully understood. The Orch OR theory follows (C), and includes aspects of (A) and (B). Orch OR suggestsconsciousness consists of discrete moments, each an ‘orchestrated’ quantum-computational process terminated bythe DP version of OR, an action rooted in quantum aspects of the fine structure of space–time geometry, this beingcoupled to brain neuronal processes via microtubules.In standard quantum mechanics the R procedure is adopted for the action of ameasurementupon a quantum system,whereby a quantum superposition of two states, these two being distinguishable by that measurement, is probabilisti-cally replaced by one or the other of those states (‘reduction of the quantum state’ or ‘collapse of the wavefunction’).But this action is normally taken to beillusoryin some sense, not being arealphysical action, but somehow theresult of some kind of approximation, or perhaps just as a convenience, or as a shift in the observer’s viewpoint, oreven as a ‘split’ in the observer’s awareness. The hypothesis of OR (objective reduction), on the other hand, assertsthat R is areal objectivephysical phenomenon, independent of any observer. Moreover it would be OR that providesthe ‘bridge’ between the quantum and classical worlds. This, however, necessitates some kind of modification of thestandard U-evolution (i.e. of the Schrödinger equation) for massive-enough systems. The DP version of OR is a par-ticular such scheme, according to which a massive physical body, placed in a quantum superposition of two differentstationary locations, would spontaneously find itself located in one or other of these locations in a timescale of orderofτ≈ ̄h/EG, whereEGis the gravitational self-energy of the difference between the (expectation values) of the twomass distributions in the constituent stationary states. Accordingly, we might say that a quantum-theoretic separationof a material object ‘from itself’ (like Schrödinger’s hypothetical dead/alive cat), would beunstableand would decayto one or the other of the component states in a time scale that approximates the valueτ. The quantityτcan also beunderstood as the tiny difference, in fundamental Planck-scale units, between the space–time geometries of the twoalternative states. Such superposition/separations tend not to be isolated from their environment, however, and wouldthen entangle with other material in the environment, so that it would be theentireentangled system that would evolveuntil reaching this objective threshold for reduction (OR) at time aroundτ≈ ̄h/EG, whereEGis now the gravitationalself-energy of the difference between the two superposed mass distributionsincludingthe relevant entangled environ-ments. At the moment of OR, at an average time of aroundτafter the formation of the superposition, the alternativespace–time possibilities reduce to just one or the other of the space–time configurations.So far, this is just the original DP proposal. However Orch OR goes further than this, and puts forward the sugges-tionthat each action of OR (taken to be in accordance with DP) is accompanied be a moment ofproto-consciousness.These events would be thought of as the elemental constituents of ‘subjective experience’, or qualia, but the vast
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7871majority of such OR events act without being part of some coherent organized structure, so that the relevant materialis normally totally dominated by random behavior in the entangled environment. Accordingly, there would normallybe no significant experience associated with these ubiquitous proto-conscious events. Yet, these moments of proto-consciousness are taken to be the primitive ingredients of actual full-blown consciousness, when they are appropriatelyorchestrated together into a coherent whole.In  the  version  of  the  DP  proposal  put  forward  in[92–95]itwas,  technically speaking, a  (not  always  explicit)assumption that the energies of the two stationary quantum states involved in the superposition were taken to be equalto one another. Here (Section4.6), we generalize DP in a novel way, which allows us to consider superposed stationarystates ofunequalenergy. We argue that for energies that differ only slightly from one another, the action of OR takesus not just to one or the other of these two constituent states in an average time of aboutτ= ̄h/EG, but the resultof the OR process is to reduce the superposition to anoscillationbetween the two, whose frequency is given by thebeatvalue, given by thedifferencebetween the two far larger quantum-mechanical frequencies associated with theenergies of the two previously superposed states. 


We suggest that it is these beat frequencies, resulting from the OrchOR processes that involve the reduction of coherently superposed tubulin states with slightly different energies, thatresult in the characteristic frequencies, such as 40 Hz gamma synchrony that appear to be correlated with consciousstates.In an uncontrolled situation occurring in the physical world, with systems in quantum superposition, OR wouldnormallyoccur spontaneously when significant environment is entangled with the system, andEGcan rapidly be-come  relatively  large,  soτis  reached  quickly,  and  the  choice  of  particular  space–time  configuration  includes  adominant component of randomness owing to the random nature of the environment. The moment of ‘subjectiveexperience’ that would be associated with this type of OR is an undifferentiated, non-cognitive, insignificantly experi-ential (‘proto-conscious’) quality. Due to the random component, such environment-induced OR ‘experience’ wouldlack information, cognition or meaning, be very brief (lowτdue to high environmentalEG) and ubiquitous, playingmerely the role of ‘decoherence’ that is familiar in standard interpretations of quantum mechanics.However, according to Orch OR, biological evolution provided structures such as microtubules, within which ORevents  could  be  ‘orchestrated’,  enabling  functional  quantum  computing  in  isolated  non-polar  ‘aromatic’  channelswithin microtubule proteins. With further evolution, orchestrated quantum superpositions in microtubules would havebeen able to persist for progressively longer times with larger values ofEG, with entanglements with other parts ofthe structure playing meaningful roles, thereby allowing significant ‘quantum computing’ to occur. Yet, with onlypartial isolation, the OR thresholdτ≈ ̄h/EGwould still only be reached by including unorchestrated environmentalentanglement, which introduces randomness in the selection of states. Accordingly, such OR quantum computingwould lack fully ‘orchestrated’ cognition, so the claimed non-computable aspects of DP OR would not come intoplay at this stage. Yet, the advantages of some form of ‘quantum computation’ in these processes could still be ofsignificant relevance, even though the OR action would be only at this ‘proto-conscious’ level.With even more advanced evolutionary development, biological factors could orchestrate and further isolate mi-crotubule quantum computing so that the OR thresholdτ≈ ̄h/EGcould now be reached by orchestrated microtubulequantum superpositions by themselves, and a relatively largeEGcould be achieved without environmental random-ness. Such Orch OR moments could provide rich cognitive subjective experience, and control conscious behavior, witha non-computable ‘willed’ influence. Moreover, since the DP version of OR is agravitationalproposal, this relatesexperiential phenomena to the fundamentals of space–time geometry. Evolution may well have favored orchestratedsuperpositions with largerEGvalues, allowing briefer timesτwhich are increasingly useful to the organism’s cogni-tion. In accordance with our earlier ideas, we might speculate that these eventually reached sufficientEGforτnear25 ms for gamma synchrony with 40 Hz or more Orch OR conscious events per second. Alternatively, according tothe Orch OR ‘beat frequency’ approach introduced here, natural MT megahertz resonances (perhaps with much largerEGvalues) enable much slower beat frequencies in the gamma synchrony range.Philosophically, Orch OR perhaps aligns most closely with Alfred North Whitehead[10,11]whoviewed mentalactivity as a process of ‘occasions’, spatio-temporal quanta, each endowed—usually on a very low level, with mental-istic characteristics which were ‘dull, monotonous, and repetitious’. These seem analogous, in the Orch OR context,to ‘proto-conscious’ non-orchestrated OR events. Whitehead viewed high level mentality, consciousness, as beingextrapolated from temporal chains of such occasions. In his view highly organized societies of occasions permit prim-itive mentality to become intense, coherent and fully conscious. These seem analogous to Orch OR conscious events.Abner Shimony[169], Henry Stapp[170]and others recognized that Whitehead’s approach was potentially compat-
72S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78ible with modern physics, specifically quantum theory, with quantum state reductions—actual events—appearing torepresent ‘occasions’, namely Whitehead’s high level mentality, composed of ‘temporal chains...of intense, coherentand fully conscious occasions’, these being tantamount to sequences of Orch OR events. These might possibly coin-cide with gamma synchrony, but with our current ‘beat frequency’ ideas gamma synchrony might more likely to be abeat effect than directly related to the OR reduction timeτ. As Orch OR events are indeed quantum state reductions,Orch OR and Whitehead’s process philosophy appear to be quite closely compatible.Whitehead’s low-level ‘dull’ occasions of experience would seem to correspond to our to non-orchestrated ‘proto-conscious’OR events. According to the DP scheme, OR processes would be taking place all the time everywhereand, normally involving the random environment, would be providing the effective randomness that is characteristicof quantum measurement. Quantum superpositions will continually be reaching the DP threshold for OR in non-biological settings as well as in biological ones, and OR would usually take place in the purely random environmentsuch as in a quantum system under measurement. Nonetheless, in the Orch OR scheme, these events are taken to havea rudimentary subjective experience, which is undifferentiated and lacking in cognition, perhaps providing the con-stitutive ingredients of what philosophers callqualia. We term such un-orchestrated, ubiquitous OR events, lackinginformation and cognition, ‘proto-conscious’. In this regard, Orch OR has some points in common with the viewpoint(B)ofSection1, which incorporates spiritualist, idealist and panpsychist elements, these being argued to be essentialprecursors of consciousness that are intrinsic to the universe. It should be stressed, however, that Orch OR is stronglysupportive of thescientificattitude that is expressed by (A), and it incorporates that viewpoint’s picture of neuralelectrochemical activity, accepting that non-quantum neural network membrane-level functions might provide an ad-equate explanation of much of the brain’sunconsciousactivity. Orch OR in microtubules inside neuronal dendritesand soma adds a deeper level for conscious processes.Conditions for Orch OR and consciousness are fairly stringent in our scheme: orchestrated superposition must beisolatedfrom the decoherence/OR effects of the random environment for long enough to reach the DP threshold whilecontinuing to perform quantum computation. Small superpositions are easier to isolate for a limited time, but requirelonger reduction timesτ, so that the isolation would need to be correspondingly more perfect.Large superpositions will reach threshold quickly, but are intrinsically more difficult to isolate. If we consider thatthebeatfrequencypicture is the appropriate one with regard to the evocation of consciousness, then we may speculatethat beat frequencies of faster, e.g. megahertz processes might possibly require only very brief reduction times. Thesemight be even as brief as 10−8s if we take the view that it is actually the case that our extended DP-OR proposalallows reduction times to be much briefer than the beat period, while still giving rise to classical beats, as speculated inSection4.6. Accordingly, one suggestion that we can make is that ‘Bandyopadhyay coherence’ (‘BC’)—the megahertzresonance, found by Bandyopadhyay’s group, suggesting coherence times of 10−7s, or the tens of kilohertz resonancethey found suggesting 10−4s—provide good evidence that such superpositions within sufficiently large collectionsof microtubules could persist in the brain for reduction timesτand Orch OR processes that could be relevant to brainfunction and consciousness.What about Orch OR in non-biological systems? After all,τ≈ ̄h/EGhappens everywhere. What kind of rolemight there be for it in consciousness elsewhere in the universe?Ve r ylarge masses can be involved in quantum superpositions, occurring in the universe in quantum-mechanicalsituations, for example in the cores of neutron stars. One might imagine thatτwould then be ridiculously tiny. ButEGcould still be relatively small if the mass-displacement remains small owing to the uniformity of the material.But generally, by OR, such large-scale superpositions would reduce extremely quickly, and classically unreasonablesuperpositions would be rapidly eliminated. Whether such quantum systems could be orchestrated to have meaningful,cognitive Orch OR conscious moments is unknown, but it is certainly conceivable that sentient creatures might haveevolved in parts of the universe that would be highly alien to us, for example on neutron-star surfaces, with verylarge scale superpositions, and presumably very high frequency OR events, an idea that was developed ingeniouslyand in great detail by Robert Forward in two science-fiction stories (Dragon’s Eggin 1980,Starquakein 1989[171,172]). Such creatures (referred to as ‘cheelas’ in the books), with metabolic processes and presumably Orch OR-likeevents occurring at rates of around a million times that of a human being, could arguably have intense experiences,but whether or not this would be possible in detail is, of now, a very speculative matter. Nevertheless, the Orch ORproposal offers a possible route to rational argument, as to whether conscious life of a totally alien kind such as this,or some other form of quantum superposition, might be possible, or even probable, somewhere in the universe.
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7873Such speculations also raise the issue of the ‘anthropic principle’, according to which it is sometimes argued thatthe particular dimensionless constants of Nature that we happen to find in our universe are apparently ‘fortuitously’favorable to human existence and consciousness. (Adimensionlessphysical constant is a pure number, like the ratioof the electric to the gravitational force between the electron and the proton in a hydrogen atom, which in this case isa number of the general order of 1040.) The key point is not so much to do with human existence, but the existence ofsentient beings of any kind, i.e. the existence of consciousness. Is there anything coincidental about the dimensionlessphysical constants being of such a nature that conscious life is possible at all? For example, if the mass of the neutronhad been slightly less than that of the proton, rather than slightly larger, then neutrons rather than protons would havebeen stable, and this would be to the detriment of the whole subject of chemistry. These issues are frequently arguedabout (see Barrow and Tipler[173]), but the Orch OR proposal provides a little more potential substance to thesearguments, since a proposal for the possibility of sentient life is, in principle, provided. A question becomes, why isthe universe favorable to consciousness?The recently proposed cosmological scheme ofconformalcyclic cosmology(CCC) (Penrose[174], Gurzadyan andPenrose[175]) also has some relevance to these issues. CCC posits that what we presently regard as the entire historyof our universe, from its Big-Bang origin (but without inflation) to its indefinitely expanding future, is but oneaeonin an unending succession of similar such aeons, where the infinite future of each matches to the big bang of thenext via an infinite change of scale. A question arises whether the dimensionless constants of the aeon prior to ours,in the CCC scheme, are the same as those in our own aeon, and this relates to the question of whether sentient lifecould exist in that aeon as well as in our own. Could the dimensionless constants change with each successive aeon,might they perhaps ‘mutate’ and evolve to optimize consciousness? Could evolution over aeons thereby account forthe anthropic principle? Smolin[176]has suggested an idea that is somewhat similar to this, but in his scheme, thedrive of selective advantage would be for more black holes and baby universes, rather than for consciousness or evenfor life. Nevertheless, the question of the constancy of these numbers is in principle answerable by observation inCCC, and this issue could have a bearing on the extent or validity of the Orch OR proposal. If Orch OR turns out tobe correct, in its essentials, as a physical basis for consciousness, then it opens up the possibility that many questionsmay become answerable, such as whether life and consciousness could have come about in an aeon prior to our own,that would have previously seemed to be far beyond the reaches of science.Moreover, Orch OR places the phenomenon of consciousness at a very central place in the physical nature of ouruniverse, whether or not this ‘universe’ includes aeons other than just our own. It is our belief that, quite apart fromdetailed aspects of the physical mechanisms that are involved in the production of consciousness in human brains,quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory. Some completion is needed, and the DP proposal for an OR schemeunderlying quantum theory’s R-process would be a definite possibility. If such a scheme as this is indeed respectedby Nature, then there is a fundamental additional ingredient to our presently understood laws of Nature which playsan important role at the Planck-scale level of space–time structure. The Orch OR proposal takes advantage of this,suggesting that conscious experience itself plays such a role in the operation of the laws of the universe.7. Conclusion‘Orchestrated objective reduction’ (‘Orch OR’) is a theory which proposes that consciousness consists of a se-quence of discrete events, each being a moment of ‘objective reduction’ (OR) of a quantum state (according to the DPscheme), where it is taken that these quantum states exist as parts of a quantum computations carried on primarily inneuronal microtubules. Such OR events would have to be ‘orchestrated’ in an appropriate way (Orch OR), for genuineconsciousness to arise. OR itself is taken to be ubiquitous in physical actions, representing the ‘bridge’ between thequantum and classical worlds, where quantum superpositions between pairs of states get spontaneously resolved intoclassical alternatives in a timescale∼τ, calculated from the amount of mass displacement that there is between thetwo states. In our own brains, the OR process that evoke consciousness, would be actions that connect brain biology(quantum computations in microtubules) with the fine scale structure of space–time geometry, the most basic levelof the universe, where tiny quantum space–time displacements are taken to be responsible for OR. The Orch-ORproposal therefore stretches across a considerable range of areas of science, touching upon the foundations of generalrelativity and quantum mechanics, in unconventional ways, in addition to the more obviously relevant areas such asneuroscience, cognitive science, molecular biology, and philosophy. It is not surprising, therefore, that Orch OR hasbeen persistently criticized from many angles since its introduction in 1994. Nonetheless, the Orch OR scheme has so
74S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78far stood the test of time better than most other schemes, and it is particularly distinguished from other proposals bythe many scientifically tested, and potentially testable, ingredients that it depends upon.It should be mentioned that various aspects of the Orch OR theory have themselves evolved in response to scientificadvances and, in some cases, constructive criticism. We here list some recent adaptations and developments that wehave now incorporated into the theory.Cell and molecular biology•Tubulin information states in Orch OR quantum and classical computation are now correlated with dipoles, ratherthan mechanical conformation, avoiding heat and energy issues.•Tubulin dipoles mediating computation and entanglement may be electric (London force charge separation), ormagnetic (electron ‘spin’ states and currents), as presented in this paper.•Enhancedelectronic conductance discovered by Anirban Bandyopadhyay’s group[88,89]in single microtubulesat warm temperature at specific alternating current gigahertz, megahertz and kilohertz frequencies (‘Bandyopad-hyay coherence’, ‘BC’) strongly supports Orch OR.•BCand Orch OR may well be mediated through intra-tubulin quantum channels of aromatic rings, like in photo-synthesis proteins, plausibly for quantum computing in microtubules.•Anestheticsbind in these tubulin quantum channels, presumably to disperse quantum dipoles necessary for con-sciousness.Brain science•Alzheimer’s disease, brain trauma and other disorders are related to microtubule disturbances; promising therapiesare being aimed at BC in the brain.•Scaleinvariant (1/f, ‘fractal-like’) processes at neuronal and network levels might perhaps extend downward tointra-neuronal BC in microtubules, e.g. megahertz excitations.•OrchOR conscious moments, e.g. at 40 Hz, are now viewed as ‘beat frequencies’ of BC megahertz in MTs,the slower beat frequencies coupled to neuronal membrane physiology and accounting for EEG correlates ofconsciousness.The Orch OR proposal suggests conscious experience is intrinsically connected to the fine-scale structure of space–timegeometry, and that consciousness could be deeply related to the operation of the laws of the universe