finer scale of neuronal information processing



3.1.  MicrotubulesInteriors of eukaryotic cells are organized and shaped by their cytoskeleton, a scaffolding-like protein network ofmicrotubules, microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), actin, and intermediate filaments[57]. Microtubules (‘MTs’,Fig. 3) are cylindrical polymers 25 nanometers (nm=10−9meter) in diameter, and of variable length, from a fewhundred nanometers, apparently up to meters in long nerve axons. MTs self-assemble from peanut-shaped ‘tubulin’proteins, each tubulin being a dimer composed of alpha and beta monomers, with a dipole giving MTs ferroelectricproperties. In MTs, tubulins are usually arranged in 13 longitudinal protofilaments whose lateral connections resultin two types of hexagonal lattices (A-lattice and B-lattice[58]), the protofilaments being shifted in relation to theirneighbors, slightly differently in each direction, resulting in differing relationships between each tubulin and its sixnearest neighbors. Helical pathways following along neighboring tubulin dimers in the A-lattice repeat every 5 and8 tubulins, respectively, down any protofilament, and following along neighboring tubulin monomers repeat every 3monomers, after winding twice around the MT (relating to the 13 protofilaments according to the Fibonacci sequence3, 5, 8, 13).Along with actin and other cytoskeletal structures, MTs self-assemble to establish cell shape, direct growth andorganize functions including those of brain neurons. Various types of MAPs bind at specific lattice sites, and bridgeto other MTs, defining cell architecture like girders and beams in a building. Another type of MAP is tau, whose dis-
44S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Fig. 3. Three time-steps (e.g. at 10 megahertz) of a microtubule automaton. Tubulin subunit dipole states (yellow, blue) represent information.(a) Spin currents interact and compute along spiral lattice pathways. For example (upper, middle in each microtubule) two upward traveling bluespin waves intersect, generating a new vertical spin wave (a ‘glider gun’ in cellular automata). (b) A general microtubule automata process[56].placement from MTs results in neurofibrillary tangles and the cognitive dysfunction of Alzheimer’s disease[59–61].Other MAPs include motor proteins (dynein, kinesin) that move rapidly along MTs, transporting cargo molecules tospecific synapses and locations. Tau proteins bound to MTs apparently serve as traffic signals, determining where mo-tor proteins deliver their cargo. Thus specific placement of tau on MT lattices appears to reflect encoded informationgoverning synaptic plasticity.MTs are particularly prevalent in neurons (109tubulins/neuron), and are uniquely stable. Non-neuronal cells un-dergo repeated cycles of cell division, or mitosis, for which MTs disassemble and re-assemble as mitotic spindleswhich separate chromosomes, establish cell polarity and architecture, then depolymerize for tubulins and MTs to bere-utilized for cell function. However neurons, once formed, don’t divide, and so neuronal MTs can remain assembledindefinitely.Dendritic–somatic MTs are unique in other ways. MTs in axons (and non-neuronal cells) are arrayed radially,extending continuously (with the same polarity) from the centrosome near the nucleus, outward toward the cell mem-brane. However MTs in dendrites and cell bodies are interrupted, of mixed polarity (Fig. 1), and arranged in localrecursive networks suitable for learning and information processing[56]. Finally, MTs in other cells can assemble atone end and dis-assemble at the other (‘treadmilling’), or grow and then abruptly dis-assemble (‘dynamic instability’,or ‘MT catastrophes’[62]). Dendritic–somatic MTs are capped by special MAPs that prevent de-polymerization[63],and are thus stable and suitable for long term information encoding and memory (Fig. 4 [64]).3.2.  Microtubule information processingAfter Sherrington’s broad observation in 1957 about the cytoskeleton as a cellular nervous system, Atema[65]proposed that tubulin conformational changes propagate as signals along microtubules. Hameroff and Watt[66]sug-gested that distinct tubulin dipoles and conformational states—mechanical changes in protein shape—could representinformation,  with  MT  lattices  acting  as  two-dimensional  Boolean  switching  matrices  with  input/output  computa-tion occurring via MAPs. MT information processing has also been viewed in the context of cellular (‘molecular’)automata (‘microtubule automata’) in which tubulin dipole and conformational states interact with neighbor tubulinstates in hexagonal MT lattices by dipole couplings, synchronized by biomolecular coherence as proposed by Fröhlich[67–71].Protein  conformational  changes  occur  at  multiple  scales[72],e.g.10−6sto10−11s  transitions.  Coordinatedmovements of the protein’s atomic nuclei, far more massive than electrons, require energy and generate heat. Earlyversions of Orch OR portrayed tubulin states as alternate mechanical conformations, coupled to, or driven by Londonforce dipoles in non-polar hydrophobic pockets[13–17]. However all calculations were based on dipole couplings,and recent Orch OR papers do not make use of conformational changes, depending instead on tubulin dipole statesalone to represent information (Section3.3below).Within MTs, each tubulin may differ from among its neighbors due to genetic variability, post-translational mod-ifications[73,74],phosphorylation  states,  binding  of  ligands  and  MAPs,  and  moment-to-moment  conformational
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7845Fig. 4. Calcium-calmodulin kinase II (‘CaMKII’), a hexagonal holoenzyme activated by synaptic calcium influx extends 6 leg-like kinase domainsabove  and  below  an  association  domain.  The  6  kinase  domains  precisely  match  hexagonal  size  and  geometry  in  both  A-lattice  and  B-latticemicrotubules ([64], with permission from Travis Craddock).and/or dipole state transitions. Synaptic inputs can register information in dendritic–somatic MTs in brain neuronsby metabotropic receptors, MAP2, and CaMKII, a hexagonal holoenzyme able to convey calcium ion influx to MTlattices by phosphorylation (Fig. 4 [64]). Thus tubulins in MTs can each exist in multiple possible states, perhapsdozens or more. However for simplicity, models of MT automata consider only two alternative tubulin states, i.e.binary ‘bits’.Another potential factor arises from the specific geometry of MT lattices in which helical winding pathways (in theA-lattice)repeat according to the Fibonacci sequence (3, 5, 8...) and may correlate with conduction pathways[75].Dipoles aligned along such pathways may be favored (and coupled to MT mechanical vibrations) thus influencing MTautomata computation.MT automata based on tubulin dipoles in hexagonal lattices show high capacity integration and learning[61].Assuming109binary tubulins per neuron switching at 10 megahertz (107) gives a potential MT-based capacity of1016operations per secondper neuron. Conventional neuronal-level approaches based on axonal firings and synaptictransmissions (1011neurons/brain, 103synapses/neuron, 102transmissions/s/synapse) give the same 1016operationsper second for the entire brain! MT-based information processing offers a huge potential increase in brain capacity[74].How would MT processes be ‘read out’ to influence neuronal and network activities in the brain? First, as pre-viouslymentioned, MT processing during dendritic–somatic integration can influence axonal firings to implementbehavior. Second, MT processes may directly result in conscious awareness. Third, MT processes can regulate synap-tic plasticity, e.g. as tracks and guides for motor proteins (dynein and kinesin) transporting synaptic precursors fromcell body to distal synapses. The guidance mechanism in choosing the proper path is unknown, but seems to involveplacement of the MAP tau at specific sites on MT lattices. In Alzheimer’s disease, tau is hyper-phosphorylated anddislodged from destabilized MTs, forming neurofibrillary tangles which correlate with memory loss[58–60]. Fourth,tubulin states can encode binding sites not only for tau, but also structural MAPs determining cytoskeletal scaffoldingand thus directly regulate neuronal structure, differentiation and synaptic formation. Finally, MT information process-
46S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Fig. 5. Molecular modeling of tubulin dimer shows aromatic amino acids tryptophan (blue), phenylalanine (purple) and tyrosine (green) in non-polar, hydrophobic regions. Red spheres are anesthetic binding sites (with permission from Craddock et al.[79]). Curved lines enclose rings inparticular aligned orientation along 5- and 8-start helical channels, containing anesthetic binding sites.ing may be directly related to activities at larger scale levels of neurons and neuronal networks through somethingof the nature of scale-invariant dynamics. Several lines of evidence point to fractal-like (1/f) self-similarity over dif-ferent spatio-temporal scales in brain dynamics and structure[76,77]. These are generally considered at the scalelevels of neurons and higher-level neuronal networks, but may extend downward in size (and higher frequency) tointra-neuronal MT dynamics, spanning 4 or 5 scale levels over many orders of magnitude.MT  information processing  depends on  interactive dipole states  of  individual tubulin proteins. What  are  thosestates,and how are they governed?3.3.  Tubulin dipoles and anesthesiaTubulin, like other proteins, is composed of a heterogeneous group of amino acid residues connected to peptidebackbones. The residues include both water-soluble polar, and water-insoluble non-polar groups, the latter includ-ing ‘aromatic’ amino acids (phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan) with ‘π’ orbital electron resonance clouds inphenyl and indole rings.πorbital clouds are composed of electrons able to delocalize across a spatial region. Likeoil separating from water, non-polar electron clouds coalesce during protein folding to form isolated water-excluding‘hydrophobic regions’ within proteins with particular (‘oily’, ‘lipid-like’) solubility. Driving the folding are non-polar,but highly polarizableπorbital electron cloud dipoles which couple by van der Waals London forces (instantaneousdipole-induced dipole attractions between electron clouds)[78].Within intra-protein hydrophobic regions, anesthetic gas molecules bind by London force dipole couplings, andthereby(somehow) exert their effects on consciousness[79–83]. Historically, views of anesthetic action have focusedon neuronal membrane proteins, but actual evidence (e.g. from genomics and proteomics)[84,85]points to anestheticaction in microtubules. In the most definitive anesthetic experiment yet performed, Emerson et al.[86]used fluorescentanthracene as an anesthetic in tadpoles, and showed cessation of tadpole behavior occurs specifically via anthraceneanesthetic binding in tadpole brain microtubules. Despite prevailing assumptions, actual evidence supports anestheticaction on microtubules.Tubulin (Fig.5) contains 32 aromatic (phenyl and indole) amino acid rings withπelectron resonance clouds, mostwithin a Forster resonance transfer distance of 1 to 2 nanometers[79]. Resonance rings align along grooves whichtraverse tubulin, and appear to meet those in neighbor tubulins along helical lattice pathways (Fig. 6a). Simulationof anesthetic molecules (Fig. 5, red spheres) shows binding in a hydrophobic channel aligned with the 5- and 8-starthelical winding pathways in the microtubule A-lattice.
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7847Fig. 6. Dipoles in tubulin and microtubule A-lattice ‘quantum channels’. (a) Seven tubulin microtubule A-lattice neighborhood with schematizedplacement of aromatic rings along 3-, 5- and 8-start helical pathways. (b) 5-start (left) and 8-start (right) helical dipoles in aligned ring dipole ‘bits’(blue, yellow) and superposition of both (gray—quantum bits, or ‘qubits’). Bottom (both dipole pathways): anesthetic gas molecules (A) form theirown (van der Waals London force) dipole couplings, dispersing collective dipoles and disrupting classical and quantum computations.Fig. 6b shows collective dipole couplings in contiguous rings. Quantum superposition of both states is shown ingray. Anesthetics (lower right) appear to disperse dipoles necessary for consciousness, resulting in anesthesia[80–83].Electron cloud dipoles may be either charge separation (electric) or electron spin (magnetic). Tubulin dipoles in OrchOR were originally described in terms of London-force electric dipoles, involving charge separation. However wenow suggest, as an alternative,magneticdipoles, which could be related to electron spin—and possibly related alsoto nuclear spins (which can remain isolated from their environments for long periods of time). ‘Spin-flips’ mightperhaps relate to alternating currents in MTs. Spin is inherently quantum in nature, and quantum spin transfer througharomatic rings is enhanced at warm temperature[87].InFigs. 6 and 7, yellow may be considered ‘spin up’, and blueconsidered ‘spin down’.It should be made clear, however, that the notions of ‘up’ and ‘down’ referred to here need not be figurative only.Thereare, in fact, directional aspects to the notion of spin; in essence, the spin direction is the direction of the axis ofrotation, where conventionally we regard the rotational direction to beright-handedabout the direction being referredto, and ‘up’ would refer to some arbitrarily chosen spatial direction and ‘down’ to the opposite direction. If the particlehas a magnetic moment (e.g. electron, proton, or neutron), its magnetic moment is aligned (or anti-aligned, accordingto the type of particle) with its spin. Within a microtubule, we might imagine ‘up’ and ‘down’ are chosen to refer tothe two opposite directions along the tube’s axis itself, or else some other choice of alignment might be appropriate.However, as indicated earlier, spin is a quintessentially quantum-mechanical quantity, and for a spin-one-half object,like an electron or a nucleon (neutron or proton), all possible directions for the spin rotation axis arise as quantumsuperpositions of some arbitrarily chosen pair of directions. Indeed the directional features of quantum spin inter-relatewith the quantum superposition principle in fundamental ways.Here,  we  may  speculate  that  chains  of  correlated  (‘up-up-up’,  ‘down-down-down’)  or  possibly  anti-correlated(‘down-up-down’, ‘up-down-up’) spin along lattice pathways in microtubules or perhaps something more subtle mightprovide biologically plausible ways of propagating quantum bit pairs (qubits) along the pathways. If such correlatedspin chains make physical sense, one might speculate that periodic spin-flip or spin-precession processes (either elec-tric or magnetic) might occur, and could be correlated with alternating currents in microtubules at specific frequencies.Electron cloud dipoles can result from either charge separation (electric) or electron spin (magnetic). Tubulin dipolesin Orch OR were originally described in terms of London force electric dipoles, charge separation. However we nowfavor magnetic dipoles, e.g. related to electron spin, possibly enabling ‘spin-flip’ alternating currents in MTs.
48S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Fig.  7.  Dipole  qubit  in  microtubule,  with  classical  and  quantum  dipole  information  states  for  the  ‘5-start’  helical  pathway  in  tubulin  and  mi-crotubules. Left: The ‘5-start’ helix in microtubule A-lattice aligned with dipoles in intra-tubulin aromatic rings. Top: ‘upward’ dipole (yellow),bottom: ‘downward’ dipole, blue. Right: Quantum superposition of both upward and downward helical paths coupled to dipole orientations, i.e.‘qubits’. Dipoles may be electric dipoles due to charge separation, or magnetic dipoles, e.g. related to electronic (and/or nuclear) spin. Similar qubitpathways may occur along 8-start pathways, or other pathways.The group of Anirban Bandyopadhyay at National Institute for Material Sciences in Tsukuba, Japan, has indeeddiscovered conductive resonances in single microtubules that are observed when there is an applied alternating currentat specific frequencies in gigahertz, megahertz and kilohertz ranges[88,89]. See Section4.5.Electron dipole shifts do have some tiny effect on nuclear positions via charge movements and Mossbauer recoil[90,91].A shift of one nanometer in electron position might move a nearby carbon nucleus a few femtometers (‘Fermilengths’, i.e. 10−15m), roughly its diameter. The effect of electron spin/magnetic dipoles on nuclear location is lessclear. Recent Orch OR publications have cast tubulin bits (and quantum bits, or qubits) as coherent entangled dipolestates acting collectively among electron clouds of aromatic amino acid rings, with only femtometer conformationalchange due to nuclear displacement[17,42]. As it turns out, femtometer displacement might be sufficient for OrchOR (Section5.2).An intra-neuronal finer scale  of MT-based  information processing could  account for  deviation from  Hodgkin–Huxley  behavior  and,  one  might  hope,  enhanced  computational  capabilities.  However  like  neuronal  models,  ap-proaches based on MT information processing with classical physics, e.g. those developed by Hameroff and colleaguesup through the 1980’s, faced a reductionist dead-end in dealing with consciousness. Enhanced computationper sefailsto address certain aspects of consciousness (Section2.1). Something was missing. Was it some subtle feature of quan-tum mechanics?