
66S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Central nervous systems consisting of approximately 300 neurons, such as those present in tiny worms and urchinsat  the  early  Cambrian  evolutionary  explosion  540  million  years  ago,  theoretically  had  sufficient  microtubules  toreachτunder one minute, and it might thus be just feasible for them to make use of Orch OR[152]. Accordingly, onemight speculate that the onset of Orch OR and primitive consciousness, albeit exceedingly slow and simple but stillwith useful conscious moments, precipitated the accelerated evolution of the Cambrian explosion.Only at a much later evolutionary stage would the selective advantages of a capability for genuine understandingcomeabout, requiring the non-computability of Orch OR that goes beyond mere quantum computation, and dependsupon  larger  scale  infrastructure  of  efficiently  functioning  MTs,  capable  of  operating  quantum-computational pro-cesses. Further evolution providing larger sets of MTs (hence largerEG) able to be isolated from decoherence wouldenable, byτ≈ ̄h/EG, more frequent and more intense moments of conscious experience, e.g. eventually in humanbrains every 25 ms in 40 Hz gamma synchrony EEG, or faster. Future evolution might enable brains to accommodateeven larger values ofEGand shorter values ofτ. At least this is one possibility. Another evolutionary improvementwould be to increase the intensity of parallel Orch OR processing, without a requirement thatτshould necessarilybecome shorter.5.6.  Orch OR criticisms and responsesOrch OR has been criticized repeatedly since its inception. Here we review and summarize major criticisms andresponses.Grush and Churchland[153]tookissue with the Gödel’s theorem argument, as well as several biological fac-tors. One objection involved the MT-disabling drug colchicine which treats diseases such as gout by immobilizingneutrophil cells which cause painful inflammation in joints. Neutrophil mobility requires cycles of MT assembly/dis-assembly, and colchicine prevents re-assembly, impairing neutrophil mobility and reducing inflammation. Grush andChurchland pointed out that patients given colchicine do not lose consciousness, concluding that microtubules cannotbe essential for consciousness. Penrose and Hameroff[12]responded point-by-point to every objection, e.g. explain-ing that colchicine does not cross the blood brain barrier, and so doesn’t reach the brain, and that brain neurons don’tdisassemble/re-assemble anyway. Colchicine infused directly into the brains of animals does cause severe cognitiveimpairment and apparent loss of consciousness[154].A-lattice vs B-lattice microtubules.MTs have two types of hexagonal lattices, A and B. Tubulin is a peanut-shapeddimer with alpha and beta monomers. In a 13 protofilament MT A-lattice, tubulin–tubulin sideways interaction occurbetween alpha monomer on one tubulin, and beta tubulin on the other (alpha–beta, and beta–alpha)[155]. This givesa seamless lattice and Fibonacci geometry which are optimal for quantum computing, and preferred in Orch OR. Inthe B-lattice, sideways interactions are alpha–alpha and beta–beta, except for a vertical seam of (A-lattice-like) alpha–beta and beta–alpha. Orch OR has predicted A-lattice MTs, but critics point to analysis of MTs from neurons, e.g.from whole mouse brains which are said to show predominantly B-lattice MTs. However these ‘B-lattice’[156,157]brain MTs have multiple seams involving 4 or more or protofilaments, so A-lattice configuration occurs in a third ofso-called B-lattice MTs. Other work shows mixed A and B lattice microtubules[158].Orch OR is expected to occur in only a fraction of suitable dendritic and somatic MTs, and perhaps only transiently,andpartially. Bandyopadhyay[142]has preliminary evidence MTs may switch between A- and B-lattice configura-tions. The MT A-lattice configuration may be rare, exist transiently as patches in otherwise B-lattice MTs, and bespecifically involved in quantum coherence, Orch OR and consciousness.Georgiev[159]questionedOrch OR on the basis of ‘not enough tubulins’. Byτ≈/EG, the superposition (EG)required for 25 ms Orch OR events is about 2×1010tubulins. Depending on the number of tubulins per neuron,and the percent of tubulin involvement, predictions can be made for the number of neurons, and percent of braininvolvement, for Orch OR conscious events. This percentage may be small, as for example superconductors have onlya tiny percentage of components in quantum states. Moreover A-lattice MTs (or A-lattice portions of B-lattice MTs)may be relatively rare, and distributed throughout many neurons. In any case, it might be that many more tubulinsare involved (such as in some versions of the beat frequency approach), e.g. 1018tubulins, 109neurons, one percentof the brain. It should be noted that Orch OR is the only theory able to meaningfully entertain such quantitativespeculation.Tuszynski et al.[160]questionedhow extremely weak gravitational energy in the DP version of OR could influencetubulin protein states. With 2×1010tubulins for 25 ms Orch OR,EGwould be roughly 10−10eV (10−29joules),
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7867seemingly  insignificant  compared  to  ambient  energykTat  10−4eV.  All  this  serves  to  illustrate  the  fact  that  theenergyEGdoes not actually play a role in physical processesasan energy, in competition with other energies thatare driving the physical (chemical, electronic) processes of relevance. As stated in Section5.1,EGis, instead, anenergy uncertainty—and it is this uncertainty that allows quantum state reduction to take place without violation ofenergy conservation. The fact thatEGis far smaller than the other energies involved in the relevant physical processesis a necessary feature of the consistency of the OR scheme, particularly with regard to energy conservation. It doesnot supply the energy to drive the physical processes involved, but it provides the energy uncertainty that allows thefreedom for processes having virtually the same energy as each other to be alternative actions. In practice, all thatEGis needed for is to tell us how to calculate the lifetimeτof the superposition.EGwould enter into issues of energybalance only if gravitational interactions between the parts of the system were important in the processes involved.(The Earth’s gravitational field plays no role in this either, because it cancels out in the calculation ofEG.) No otherforces of nature directly contribute toEG, which is just as well, because if they did, there would be a gross discrepancywith observational physics.Tegmark[161]publisheda critique of Orch OR based on his calculated decoherence times for microtubules of10−13seconds at biological temperature, far too brief for physiological effects. However Tegmark didn’t include OrchOR stipulations and in essence created, and then refuted hisownquantum microtubule model. He assumed superpo-sitions of solitons separated from themselves by a distance of 24 nanometers along the length of the microtubule. Aspreviously described, superposition separation in Orch OR is at the Fermi length level of atomic nuclei, i.e. 7 orders ofmagnitude smaller than Tegmark’s separation value, thus underestimating decoherence time by 7 orders of magnitude,i.e. from 10−13s to microseconds at 10−6seconds. Hagan et al.[162]used Tegmark’s same formula and recalculatedmicrotubule decoherence times using Orch OR stipulations, finding 10−4to 10−3seconds, or longer. In any case,experimentally, Bandyopadhyay’s group has found 10 kHz resonance, i.e. 10−4seconds coherence times. Also, asstated earlier, there are versions of the beat-frequency scheme that would require much shorter decoherence times,though at the expense of correspondingly larger bodies of material being involved in the quantum-coherent states.Koch and Hepp[163]challengedOrch OR with a thought experiment, describing a person observing a superpo-sition of a cat both dead and alive with one eye, the other eye distracted by a series of images (‘binocular rivalry’).Without  explaining  how  an  observable  superposition  of  this  kind  could  be  prepared  (where  according  to  OR,  byτ≈ ̄h/EG, the  cat  would already be  either dead or alive long  before  being observed), they asked  ‘Where  in  theobserver’s brain would reduction occur?’, apparently assuming Orch OR followed the version of the Copenhagen in-terpretation in which conscious observation, in effect,causesquantum state reduction (placing consciousness outsidescience). This is precisely the opposite of Orch OR in which consciousnessisthe orchestrated quantum state reduc-tion given by OR. But in the straightforward case of conscious observation of an already dead or alive cat, reduction(Orch OR) and consciousness would most likely occur in dendritic–somatic microtubules in neurons in visual andassociative cortex and other brain areas, anatomically the same as in neuronal-based theories, except at an additional,‘deeper order’.Orch OR can (at least in principle) account for the related issue of bistable perceptions (e.g. the famous face/vaseillusion,or Necker cube). Non-conscious superpositions of both possibilities (face and vase) during pre-consciousquantum superposition then reduce by OR at timeτ≈/EGto a conscious perception of one or the other, faceorvase. The reduction could be taken to occur among microtubules within neurons in various areas of visual andpre-frontal cortex and other brain regions, again the same as neuronal-based theories but at a deeper, quantum levelinside neurons.Reimers et al.[164]describedthree types of Fröhlich condensation (weak, strong and coherent, the first classi-cal and the latter two quantum). They validated 8 MHz coherence measured in microtubules by Pokorný[134,135]as weak condensation. Based on simulation of a 1-dimensional linear chain of tubulin dimers representing a micro-tubule, they concluded that only weak Fröhlich condensation occurs in microtubules. Claiming that Orch OR requiresstrong or coherent Fröhlich condensation, they concluded Orch OR is invalid. However Samsonovich et al.[165]sim-ulated a microtubule as a 2-dimensional lattice plane with toroidal boundary conditions and found Fröhlich resonancemaxima at discrete locations in super-lattice patterns on the simulated microtubule surface which precisely matchedexperimentally observed functional attachment sites for microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs). In any case, thesesimulations are superseded by experimental evidence for gigahertz, megahertz and kilohertz resonance discovered insingle MTs by the Bandyopadhyay group (‘Bandyopadhyay coherence’, ‘BC’)
68S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78McKemmish et al.[166]challenged the Orch OR contention that tubulin switching is mediated by London forces,pointing out that mobileπelectrons in a benzene ring (e.g. a phenyl ring without attachments) are completely delo-calized, and hence cannot switch between states, nor exist in superposition of both states. Agreed; a single benzenecannot engage in switching. London forces occur between two or moreπelectron cloud ring structures, or othernon-polar groups. A single benzene ring cannot support London forces. It takes two (or more) to tango. Orch OR hasalways maintained two or more non-polar groups are necessary, and now invokes contiguous arrays of such groups inquantum channels through tubulin and through microtubules. Moreover we now add the possibility that magnetic spindipoles mediate Orch OR.McKemmish et al. further assert that tubulin switching in Orch OR requires significant conformational structuralchange,and that the only mechanism for such conformational switching is due to GTP hydrolysis, i.e. conversion ofguanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP) with release of phosphate group energy, and tubulinconformational flexing. McKemmish et al. correctly point out that driving synchronized MT oscillations by hydrol-ysis of GTP to GDP and conformational changes would be prohibitive in terms of energy requirements and heatproduced. This is agreed. However, we clarify that tubulin switching in Orch OR need not actually involve signifi-cant conformational change, that electron cloud dipoles (London forces), or magnetic spin dipoles are sufficient forbit-like switching, superposition and qubit function (Figs. 5–7). We acknowledge tubulin conformational switchingas discussed in early Orch OR publications and illustrations do indicate significant conformational changes. Theyare  admittedly,  though  unintentionally, misleading. Discovery  of  gigahertz,  megahertz  and  kilohertz  BC  in  singlemicrotubules supports dipole states providing a favorable signal with regard to the underlying ideas of Orch OR.The only tubulin conformational factor required in Orch OR is superposition separation at the level of atomicnuclei,e.g. 2.5 Fermi length for carbon nuclei (2.5 femtometers; 2.5×10−15meters). This shift may be accountedfor by electronic cloud dipoles with Mossbauer nuclear recoil and charge effects[90,91]. Tubulin switching in OrchOR requires neither GTP hydrolysis nor significant conformational changes, depending on collective London forcedipoles, or magnetic spin dipoles in quantum channels of aromatic rings (Figs. 5–7).5.7.  Testable predictions of Orch OR – current statusOrch OR involves numerous fairly specific and essentially falsifiable hypotheses. In 1998 twenty testable predic-tions of Orch OR in 9 general categories were published[15]. They are reviewed here with our comments on theircurrent status initalics.Neuronal microtubules are directly necessary for cognition and consciousness1.  Synaptic plasticity correlates with cytoskeletal architecture/activities.Thecurrent status of this is unclear, al-though microtubule networks do appear to define and regulate synapses.2.  Actions of psychoactive drugs, including antidepressants, involve neuronal microtubules.Thisindeed appears tobe the case. Fluoxitene(Prozac)acts through microtubules[167];anesthetics also act through MTs[86].3.  Neuronal microtubule stabilizing/protecting drugs may prove useful in Alzheimer’s disease.There is now someevidence that this may be so; for example, MT-stabilizer epithilone is being tested in this way[168].Microtubules communicate by cooperative dynamics4.  Coherent gigahertz excitations will be found in microtubules.Indeed;in some remarkable new research, AnirbanBandyopadhyay’s group has found coherent gigahertz, megahertz and kilohertz excitations in single MTs[88,89].5.  Dynamic microtubule vibrations correlate with cellular activity.Evidenceon this issue is not yet clear, althoughmechanical megahertz vibrations(ultrasound)do appear to stimulate neurons and enhance mood[127].6.  Stable microtubule patterns correlate with memory.Theevidence concerning memory encoding in MTs remainsunclear, though synaptic messengers CaMKII and PkMz do act through MTs. Each CaMKII may encode(byphosphorylation)6information bits to6tubulins in a microtubule lattice.7.  ‘EPR-like’ non-local correlation between separated microtubules.Thisis not at all clear, but such things are veryhard to establish(or refute)experimentally. Bandyopadhyay’s group is testing for ‘wireless’ resonance transferbetween separated MTs[142].
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7869Quantum coherence occurs in microtubules8.  Phases of quantum coherence will be detected in microtubules.There appears to be some striking evidence foreffects of this general nature in Bandyopadhyay’s recent results[88,89],differing hugely from classical expecta-tions, where electrical resistance drops dramatically, at certain very specific frequencies, in a largely-temperatureindependent and length-independent way.9.  Cortical dendrites contain largely ‘A-lattice’, compared to B-lattice, microtubules.Althoughthere is some con-trary evidence to this assertion, the actual situation remains unclear. Orch OR has been criticized because mousebrain microtubules are predominantly B lattice MTs. However these same mouse brain MTs are partially A-latticeconfiguration, and other research shows mixed A and B lattice MTs[156–158].Bandyopadhyay has preliminaryevidence that MTs can shift between A- and B-lattice configurations[142],and A-lattices may be specific forquantum processes. Orch OR could also utilize B lattices, although apparently not as efficiently as A-lattice.In any case, A-lattice MTs could well be fairly rare, specific for quantum effects, and sufficient for Orch ORsince  the  A-lattice  may  be  needed  only  in  a  fraction  of  MTs  in  dendrites  and  soma,  and  perhaps  only  tran-siently.10.  Coherent photons will be detected from microtubules.Apositive piece of evidence in this direction is the detec-tion of gigahertz excitations in MTs by Bandyopadhyay’s group, which may be interpreted as coherent photons[88,89].Microtubule quantum coherence is protected by actin gelation11.  Dendritic–somatic microtubules are intermittently surrounded by tight actin gel.Thisis perhaps a moot point,now,  in  view  of  recent  results by  Bandyopadhyay’s group, as  it  now  appears  that  coherence occurs  at  warmtemperature without actin gel.12.  Cycles of actin gelation and solution correlate with electrophysiology, e.g. gamma synchrony EEG.Again,thisnow appears to be a moot point, for the same reason as above.13.  Sol–gel cycles are mediated by calcium ion flux from synaptic inputs.Noclear evidence, but again a moot point.Macroscopic quantum coherence occurs among hundreds of thousands of neurons and glia inter-connected bygapjunctionsGap junctions between glia and neurons have not been found, but gap junction interneurons interweave the entirecortex.14.  Electrotonic gap junctions synchronize neurons.Gapjunction interneurons do appear to mediate gamma syn-chrony EEG[49–54].15.  Quantum tunneling occurs across gap junctions.Asyet untested.16.  Quantum correlations between microtubules in different neurons occurs via gap junctions.Asyet untested. How-ever Bandyopadhyay has preliminary evidence that spatially separated MTs, perhaps even in different neurons,become entangled in terms of their BC resonances[142],so gap junctions may be unnecessary for Orch OR.The amount of neural tissue involved in a conscious event is inversely related to the event time byτ≈/EG17.  Functional imaging and electrophysiology will show perception and response time shorter with more neural massinvolved.As a ‘prediction’ of Orch OR, the status of this is not very clear; moreover it is very hard to provide anyclear estimate of the neural mass that is involved in a ‘perception’. As a related issue, there does appear to beevidence for some kind of scale-invariance in neurophysiological processes(Section3.2 [76,77]).An unperturbed isolated quantum state self-collapses (OR) according toτ≈/EG18.  Technological quantum superpositions will be shown to undergo OR byτ≈/EG.Various experiments are beingdeveloped which should supply an answer to this fundamental question[108],but they appear to remain severalyears away from being able to achieve firm conclusions.
70S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Microtubule-based cilia/centrioles are quantum optical devices19.  Microtubule-based cilia  in  retinal  rod  and  cone  cells  detect photon  quantum information.Thisappears  to  beuntested, so far.A critical degree of microtubule activity enabled consciousness during evolution20.  Fossils will show organisms from early Cambrian (540 million years ago), had sufficient microtubule capacityforOR byτ≈/EGof less than a minute, perhaps resulting in rudimentary Orch OR, consciousness and the‘Cambrian evolutionary explosion’.It is clearly hard to know an answer to this one, particularly because the levelof consciousness in extinct creatures would be almost impossible to determine. However present day organismslooking remarkably like early Cambrian creatures(actinosphaerum, nematodes)are known to have over109tubulins[56].It would appear that the expectations of Orch OR have fared rather well so far, and it gives us a viable scientificproposalaimed at providing an understanding of the phenomenon of consciousness. We believe that the underlyingscheme of Orch OR has a good chance of being basically correct in its fundamental conceptions.