


50S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–784.3.  The measurement problem and objective reduction (OR)The issue of why we don’t directly perceive quantum superpositions is a manifestation of themeasurement prob-lemmentioned above. Put more precisely, the measurement problem is the conflict between the two fundamentalprocedures of quantum mechanics. One of these procedures, referred to asunitary evolution, denoted here by U, isthe continuous deterministic evolution of the quantum state (i.e. of the wavefunction of the entire system) accordingto the fundamentalSchrödinger equation, The other is the procedure that is adopted whenever a measurement of thesystem—orobservation—is deemed to have taken place, where the quantum state is discontinuously and probabilis-tically replaced by another quantum state (referred to, technically, as aneigenstateof a mathematical operator thatis taken to describe the measurement). This discontinuous jumping of the state is referred to as thereductionof thestate (or the ‘collapse of the wavefunction’), and will be denoted here by the letter R. This conflict between U and Ris what is encapsulated by the term ‘measurement problem’ (but perhaps more accurately it may be referred to as ‘themeasurementparadox’) and its problematic nature is made manifest when we consider the measuring apparatus itselfas a quantum entity, which is part of the entire quantum system consisting of the original system under observationtogether with this measuring apparatus. The apparatus is, after all, constructed out of the same type of quantum ingre-dients (electrons, photons, protons, neutrons etc.—or quarks and gluons etc.) as is the system under observation, so itought to be subject also to the same quantum laws, these being described in terms of the continuous and determinis-tic U. How, then, can the discontinuous and probabilistic R come about as a result of the interaction (measurement)between two parts of the quantum system? This is the paradox faced by the measurement problem.There are many ways that quantum physicists have attempted to come to terms with this conflict[110–114].Inthe early 20th century, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr, together with Werner Heisenberg, proposed the pragmatic‘Copenhagen interpretation’, according to which the wavefunction of a quantum system, evolving according to U, isnot assigned any actual physical ‘reality’, but is taken as basically providing the needed ‘book-keeping’ so that even-tually probability values can be assigned to the various possible outcomes of a quantum measurement. The measuringdevice itself is explicitly taken to behaveclassicallyand no account is taken of the fact that the device is ultimatelybuilt from quantum-level constituents. The probabilities are calculated, once the nature of the measuring device isknown, from the state that the wavefunction has U-evolved to at the time of the measurement. The discontinuous‘jump’ that the wavefunction makes upon measurement, according to R, is attributed to the change in ‘knowledge’that the result of the measurement has on the observer. Since the wavefunction is not assigned physical reality, but isconsidered to refer merely to the observer’s knowledge of the quantum system, the jumping is considered simply toreflect the jump in the observer’s knowledge state, rather than in the quantum system under consideration.Many physicists remain unhappy with such a point of view, however, and regard it largely as a ‘stop-gap’, in orderthatprogress can be made in applying the quantum formalism, without this progress being held up by a lack of aserious quantum ontology, which might provide a more complete picture of what is actually going on. One may ask,in particular, what it is about a measuring device that allows one to ignore the fact that it is itself made from quantumconstituents and is permitted to be treated entirely classically. A good many proponents of the Copenhagen standpointwould take the view that while the physical measuring apparatus ought actually to be treated as a quantum system, andtherefore part of an over-riding wavefunction evolving according to U, it would be theconscious observer, examiningthe readings on that device, who actually reduces the state, according to R, thereby assigning a physical reality to theparticular observed alternative resulting from the measurement. Accordingly, before the intervention of the observer’sconsciousness, the various alternatives of the result of the measurementincludingthe different states of the measuringapparatus would, in effect, still have to be treated as coexisting in superposition, in accordance with what would bethe usual evolution according to U. In this way, the Copenhagen viewpoint puts consciousness outside science, anddoes not seriously address the ontological nature or physical role of superposition itself nor the question of how largequantum superpositions like Schrödinger’s superposed live and dead cat (see below) mightactuallybecome one thingor another.A more extreme variant of this approach is the ‘multiple worlds hypothesis’ of Everett[115]inwhich each pos-sibility in a superposition evolves to form its own universe, resulting in an infinite multitude of coexisting ‘parallel’worlds. The stream of consciousness of the observer is supposed somehow to ‘split’, so that there is one in each of theworlds—at least in those worlds for which the observer remains alive and conscious. Each instance of the observer’sconsciousness experiences a separate independent world, and is not directly aware of any of the other worlds.
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7851A more ‘down-to-earth’ viewpoint is that ofenvironmental decoherence, in which interaction of a superpositionwith its environment ‘erodes’ quantum states, so that instead of a single wavefunction being used to describe thestate, a more complicated entity is used, referred to as adensity matrix. However, decoherence does not provide aconsistent ontology for therealityof the world, in relation to the density matrix (see, for example, Penrose[24],Sections 29.3–29.6), and provides merely a pragmatic procedure. Moreover, it does not address the issue of how Rmight arise in isolated systems, nor the nature of isolation, in which an external ‘environment’ would not be involved,nor does it tell us which part of a system is to be regarded as the ‘environment’ part, and it provides no limit to thesize of that part which can remain subject to quantum superposition.Still other approaches include various types ofobjectivereduction(OR) in which a specific objective thresholdis proposed to cause quantum state reduction[116–118]. The specific OR scheme that is used in Orch OR will bedescribed below.The quantum pioneer Erwin Schrödinger took pains to point out the difficulties that confront the U-evolution ofaquantum system with his still-famous thought experiment called ‘Schrödinger’s cat’[119]. Here, the fate of a catin a box is determined by magnifying a quantum event (say the decay of a radioactive atom, within a specific timeperiod that would provide a 50% probability of decay) to a macroscopic action which would kill the cat, so thataccording to Schrödinger’s own U-evolution the cat would be in a quantum superposition of being both dead and aliveat the same time. According to this perspective on the Copenhagen interpretation, if this U-evolution is maintaineduntil the box is opened and the cat observed, then it would have to be the conscious human observing the cat thatresults in the cat becoming either dead or alive (unless, of course, the cat’s own consciousness could be consideredto have already served this purpose). Schrödinger intended to illustrate the absurdity of the direct applicability of therules of quantum mechanics (including his own U-evolution) when applied at the level of a cat. Like Einstein, heregarded quantum mechanics as an incomplete theory, and his ‘cat’ provided an excellent example for emphasizingthis incompleteness. There is a need for something to be done about quantum mechanics, irrespective of the issue ofits relevance to consciousness.4.4.  OR and quantum gravityDiósi–Penrose objective reduction (DP) is a particular proposal for an extension of current quantum mechanics,taking the bridge between quantum- and classical-level physics as a ‘quantum-gravitational’ phenomenon. This is incontrast with the various conventional viewpoints (see Section4.3), whereby this bridge is claimed to result, some-how, from ‘environmental decoherence’, or from ‘observation by a conscious observer’, or from a ‘choice betweenalternative worlds’, or some other interpretation of how the classical world of one actual alternative may be taken toarise out of fundamentally quantum-superposed ingredients.The DP version of OR involves a different interpretation of the term ‘quantum gravity’ from what is usual. Currentideasof quantum gravity (see, for example, Smolin[120]) normally refer, instead, to some sort of physical schemethat is to be formulated within the bounds of standard quantum field theory—although no particular such theory,among the multitude that has so far been put forward, has gained anything approaching universal acceptance, norhas any of them found a fully consistent, satisfactory formulation. ‘OR’ here refers to the alternative viewpoint thatstandard quantum (field) theory is not the final answer, and that the reduction R of the quantum state (‘collapse ofthe wavefunction’) that is adopted in standard quantum mechanics is anactualphysical process which is not partof the conventional unitary formalism U of quantum theory (or quantum field theory). In the DP version of OR, thereduction R of the quantum state does not arise as some kind of convenience or effective consequence of environmentaldecoherence, etc., as the conventional U formalism would seem to demand, but is instead taken to be one of theconsequences of melding together the principles of Einstein’s general relativity with those of the conventional unitaryquantum formalism U, and this demands a departure from the strict rules of U. According to this OR viewpoint, anyquantum measurement—whereby the quantum-superposed alternatives produced in accordance with the U formalismbecomes reduced to a single actual occurrence—is arealobjective physical process, and it is taken to result from themass displacement between the alternatives being sufficient, in gravitational terms, for the superposition to becomeunstable.In the DP scheme for OR, the superposition reduces to one of the alternatives in a timescaleτthatcan be estimated(for a superposition of two states each of which is assumed to be taken to be stationary on its own) according to theformulaτ≈ ̄h/EG. An important point to make aboutτ, however, is that it represents merely a kind ofaveragetime
52S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78Fig. 8. Space–time geometry schematized as one spatial and one temporal dimension in which particle location is represented as curvature. Left: Topand bottom show space–time histories of two alternative particle locations. Right: Quantum superposition of both particle locations as bifurcatingspace–time depicted as the union (‘glued together version’) of the two alternative histories (adapted from Penrose[24], p. 338).for the state reduction to take place. It is very much like ahalf-lifein a radioactive decay. The actual time of decayin each individual state-reduction event, according to DP (in its current form), is taken to be a random process. Suchan event would involve the entire (normally entangled) state, and would stretch across all the superposed material thatis involved in the calculation ofEG. According to DP (in its current form), the actual time of decay in a particularstate-reduction event occurs simultaneously (in effect) over the entire state involved in the superposition, and it is takento follow theτ≈ ̄h/EGformula on theaverage(in a way similar to radioactive decay). Here ̄h(=h/2π)isDirac’sform of Planck’s constanthandEGis thegravitational self-energyof thedifferencebetween the two (stationary)mass distributions of the superposition. (For a superposition for which each mass distribution is a rigid translation ofthe other,EGis the energy it would cost to displace one component of the superposition in the gravitational field ofthe other, in moving it from coincidence to the quantum-displaced location[121].)It is helpful to have a conceptual picture of quantum superposition in a gravitational context. According to modernacceptedphysical theories, reality is rooted in 3-dimensional space and a 1-dimensional time, combined togetherinto a 4-dimensionalspace–time. This space–time is slightly curved, in accordance with Einstein’s general theory ofrelativity, in a way which encodes the gravitational fields of all distributions of mass density. Each different choiceof mass density effects a space–time curvature in a different, albeit a very tiny, way. This is the standard pictureaccording toclassicalphysics. On the other hand, whenquantumsystems have been considered by physicists, thismass-induced tiny curvature in the structure of space–time has been almost invariably ignored, gravitational effectshaving been assumed to be totally insignificant for normal problems in which quantum theory is important. Surprisingas it may seem, however, such tiny differences in space–time structurecanhave large effects, for they entail subtle butfundamental influences on the very rules of quantum mechanics[92–95].In the current context, superposed quantum states for which the respective mass distributions differ significantlyfromone another will have space–time geometries that also correspondingly differ. For illustration, inFig. 8,weconsider a 2-dimensional space–time sheet (one space and one time dimension). InFig. 8at left, the top and bottomalternative curvatures indicate a mass in two distinct locations. If that mass were in superposition of both locations,we might expect to see both curvatures, i.e. the bifurcating space–time depicted in the right ofFig. 8, this being theunion (“glued together version”) of the two alternative space–time histories that are depicted on the left. The initialpart of each space–time is at the upper left of each individual space–time diagram, and so the bifurcating space–timediagram on right moving downward and rightward illustrates two alternative mass distributions evolving in time, theirspace–time curvature separation increasing.Quantum-mechanically (so long as OR has not taken place), the ‘physical reality’ of this situation, as provided bytheevolving wavefunction, is being illustrated as an actual superposition of these two slightly differing space–timemanifolds, as indicated on the right ofFig. 8. Of course there is additional artistic license involved in drawing thespace–time sheets as 2-dimensional, whereas the actual space–time constituents are 4-dimensional. Moreover, there isno significance to be attached to the imagined ‘3-dimensional space’ within which the space–time sheets seem to beresiding. There is no ‘actual’ higher dimensional space there, the ‘intrinsic geometry’ of the bifurcating space–timebeing all that has physical significance. When the ‘separation’ of the two space–time sheets reaches a critical amount,one of the two sheets ‘dies’—in accordance with the OR criterion—the other being the one that persists in physical
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7853Fig. 9. As superposition curvatureEreaches threshold (byEG= ̄h/τ), OR occurs and one particle location/curvature is selected, and becomesclassical. The other ceases to exist.reality. The quantum state thus reduces (OR), by choosing between either the curved or flat space–time in each of thetwo separations inFig. 8.It  should  be  made  clear  that  this  measure  of  superposition  separation  is  only  very  schematically  illustrated  asthe‘distance’ between the two sheets inFig. 8. As remarked above, there is no physically existing ‘ambient higherdimensional space’ inside which the two sheets reside. The degree of separation between the space–time sheets isa more abstract mathematical thing; it would be more appropriately described in terms of asymplectic measureonthe space of 4-dimensional metrics (cf.[92,121]) but the details (and difficulties) of this will not be important for ushere. It may be noted, however, that this separation is a space–time separation, not just a spatial one. Thus thetimeof separation contributes as well as the spatial displacement. It is the product of the temporal separationTwith thespatial separationSthat measures the overall degree of separation, and OR takes place when this overall separationreaches the critical amount.In the absence of a coherent theory of quantum gravity there is no accepted way of handling such a superpositionasa separation (or bifurcation) of space–time geometry, or in any other way. Indeed the basic principles of Einstein’sgeneral relativity begin to come into profound conflict with those of quantum mechanics[93,95]. Some form of ORis needed.The OR process is considered to occur when quantum superpositions between such slightly differing space–timestake place (Fig. 9), differing from one another by an integrated space–time measure which compares with the funda-mental and extremely tiny Planck (4-volume) scale of space–time geometry. As remarked above, this is a 4-volumePlanck measure, involving both time and space, so we find that the time measure would be particularly tiny whenthe space-difference measure is relatively large (as with Schrödinger’s hypothetical cat), but for extremely tiny space-difference measures, the time measure might be fairly long. For example, an isolated single electron in a superposedstate  (very  lowEG)  might  reach  OR  threshold  only  after  thousands  of  years  or  more,  whereas  if  Schrödinger’s(∼10 kg) cat were to be put into a superposition, of life and death, this threshold could be reached in far less than eventhe Planck time of 10−43s.As already noted, the degree of separation between the space–time sheets is technically a symplectic measure on thespaceof 4-metrics which is a space–time separation, not just a spatial one, the time of separation contributing as wellas spatial displacement. Roughly speaking, it is the product of the temporal separationTwith the spatial separationSthat measures the overall degree of separation, and (DP) OR takes place when this overall separation reaches a criticalamount. This critical amount would be of the order of unity, inabsolute units, for which the Planck–Dirac constant ̄h, the gravitational constantG, and the velocity of lightc, all take the value unity, cf.[24], pp. 337–339. For small S,the lifetimeτ≈Tof the superposed state will be large; on the other hand, ifSis large, thenτwill be small.To estimateS,we compute (in the Newtonian limit of weak gravitational fields) the gravitational self-energyEGof the difference between the mass distributions of the two superposed states. (That is, one mass distribution countspositively and the other, negatively; see[92,114,121].) The quantitySis then given by:S≈EGandT≈τ, whenceτ≈ ̄h/EG,i.e.EG≈ ̄h/τ.  Thus,  the  DP  expectation  is  that  OR  occurs  with  the  resolving  out  of  one  particularspace–time geometry from the previous superposition when, on the average,τ≈ ̄h/EG.The Orch-OR scheme adopts DP as a physical proposal, but it goes further than this by attempting to relate thisparticularversion of OR to the phenomenon ofconsciousness. Accordingly, the ‘choice’ involved in any quantumstate-reduction process would be accompanied by a (miniscule) proto-element of experience, which we refer to asa moment ofproto-consciousness, but we do not necessarily refer to this asactualconsciousness for reasons to bedescribed.
54S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–784.5.  OR and Orch ORFor Orch OR and consciousness to occur, quantum superpositions of gravitational self-energyEGwould need toavoid environmental decoherence long enough to reach timeτbyτ≈ ̄h/EG. Indeed, it is essential for Orch OR thatsome degrees of freedom in the system are kept isolated from environmental decoherence, so that OR can be made useof by the system in a controlled way. It should be made clear that in the DP scheme environmental decoherence neednot necessarily be playing an important role in any particular instance of state reduction, although in uncontrolledsituations the environment may well supply the major contribution toEG. What DP does require is that when state re-duction R takes place, thisalwaysoccurs spontaneously, by this gravitational criterion. In nearly all physical situations,there would be much material from the environment that would be entangled with a quantum-superposed state, andit could well be that the major mass displacement—and therefore the major contribution toEG—would occur in theenvironment rather than in the system under consideration. Since the environment will be quantum-entangled with thesystem, the state-reduction in the environment will effect a simultaneous reduction in the system. This could shortenthe time for the state reduction R to take place in a superposed system very considerably from what it would have beenwithout the environmental influence. The environment would also introduce an uncontrollable random element intothe result of the reduction, so that any non-random (albeit non-computable) element influencing the particular choiceof state that is  actually resolved out from the superposition would be completely masked by this randomness. Inthese circumstances the OR-process would be indistinguishable from the standard R-process of conventional quantummechanics, which could be considered to be effected by standard environmental decoherence.If, however, a quantum superposition is (1) ‘orchestrated’, i.e. adequately organized, imbued with cognitive in-formation,and capable of integration and computation, and (2) isolated from non-orchestrated, random environmentlong enough for the superpositionEGto evolve by the U formalism to reach timeτbyτ≈ ̄h/EG, then Orch ORwill occur and this, according to the scheme, will result in a moment of consciousness. Thus if the suggested non-computable effects of this OR proposal are to be laid bare, where DP is being adopted and made use of in biologicalevolution, and ultimately orchestrated for moments of actual consciousness, we indeed need significant isolation fromthe environment.As yet, no experiment has been refined enough to determine whether the (DP) OR proposal is actually respectedbyNature, but the experimental testing of the scheme is fairly close to the borderline of what can be achieved withpresent-day technology (see[122]). For example, one ought to begin to see the effects of this OR scheme if a smallobject,  such  as  a  10-μm  cube  of  crystalline  material  could  be  held  in  a  coherent  superposition  of  two  locations,differing by about the diameter of an atomic nucleus, for some seconds, or perhaps minutes to reach threshold byτ≈ ̄h/EG.A point of importance, in such proposed experiments, and in estimating requirements for Orch OR, is that in ordertocalculateEGit is not enough to base the calculation on an average density of the material in the superposition,since the mass will be concentrated in the atomic nuclei, and for a displacement of the order of the diameter of anucleus, this inhomogeneity in the density of the material can be crucial, and may well provide a much larger valueforEGthan  would  be  obtained  if  the  material  is  assumed  to  be  homogeneous.  The  Schrödinger  equation  (morecorrectly,  in  the  zero-temperature  approximation,  the  Schrödinger–Newton  equation,  see[102,117])  for  the  staticunsuperposed material would have to be solved, at least approximately, in order to derive the expectation value of themass distribution in each of the two separate components of the superposition. In the stationary wavefunction of eachcomponent, there would be some quantum spread in the locations of the particles constituting the nuclei (i.e. eachcomponent’s wavefunction would not normally be very sharply peaked at these particle locations, as the locationswould be considerably spread out in most materials).In the situations under consideration here, where we expect a conscious brain to be at far from zero temperature, andbecausetechnological quantum computers require zero temperature, it is very reasonable to question quantum brainactivities. Nevertheless, it is now well known that superconductivity and other large-scale quantum effects can actuallyoccur  at  temperatures  very  far  from  absolute  zero.  Indeed,  biology  appears  to  have  evolved  thermal  mechanismstopromotequantum coherence. In 2003, Ouyang and Awschalom[87]showed that quantum spin transfer throughphenyl ringπorbital resonance clouds (the same as those in protein hydrophobic regions, as illustrated inFigs. 5–7)are enhanced at increasingly warm temperatures. (Spin flip currents through microtubule pathways, as suggested inSection3.3above, may be directly analogous.)
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7855In the past 6 years, evidence has accumulated that plants routinely use quantum coherent electron transport atambient temperatures in photosynthesis[123,124]. Photons are absorbed in one region of a photosynthetic proteincomplex, and their energy is conveyed by electronic excitations through the protein to another region to be convertedto  chemical  energy  to  make  food.  In  this  transfer,  electrons  utilize  multiple  pathways  simultaneously,  throughπelectron clouds in a series of chromophores (analogous to hydrophobic regions) spaced nanometers apart, maximizingefficiency (e.g. via so-called ‘exciton hopping’). Chromophores in photosynthesis proteins appear to enable electronquantum conductance precisely like aromatic rings are proposed in Orch OR to function in tubulin and microtubules(Figs. 5–7)[125].Quantum conductance through photosynthesis protein is enhanced by mechanical vibration[126],and microtubulesappear to have their own set of mechanical vibrations (e.g. in megahertz as suggested by Sahu et al.[88,89]). Mega-hertz mechanical vibrations is ultrasound, and brief, low intensity (sub-thermal) ultrasound administered through theskull to the brain modulates electrophysiology, behavior and affect, e.g. improved mood in patients suffering fromchronic pain, perhaps by direct excitation of brain microtubules[127].Further research has shown warm quantum effects in bird-brain navigation[128],ion channels[129], sense of smell[130],DNA[131], protein folding[132], and biological water[133]. What about quantum effects in microtubules?In the 1980s and 1990s theoretical models predicted ‘Fröhlich’ gigahertz coherence and ferroelectric effects in mi-crotubules[61,66,70]. In 2001 and 2004, coherent megahertz emissions were detected from living cells and ascribedto microtubule dynamics (powered by mitochondrial electromagnetic fields) by the group of Jiri Pokorný in Prague[134,135].Beginning  in  2009,  Anirban  Bandyopadhyay  and  colleagues  at  the  National  Institute  of  Material  Sciences  inTsukuba,Japan, were able to use nanotechnology to address electronic and optical properties of individual micro-tubules[88,89]. The group has made a series of remarkable discoveries suggesting that quantum effects do occur inmicrotubules at biological temperatures. First, they found that electronic conductance along microtubules, normallyextremely good insulators, becomes exceedingly high, approaching quantum conductance, at certain specific reso-nance frequencies of applied alternating current (AC) stimulation. These resonances occur in gigahertz, megahertzand kilohertz ranges, and are particularly prominent in low megahertz (e.g. 8.9 MHz). Conductances induced by spe-cific (e.g. megahertz) AC frequencies appear to follow several types of pathways through the microtubule—helical,linear along the microtubule axis, and ‘blanket-like’ along/around the entire microtubule surface. Second, using var-ious techniques, the Bandyopadhyay group also determined AC conductance through 25-nm-wide microtubules isgreater than through single 4-nm-wide tubulins, indicating cooperative, possibly quantum coherent effects throughoutthe microtubule, and that the electronic properties of microtubules are programmed within each tubulin. Their resultsalso showed that conductance increased with microtubule length, indicative of quantum mechanisms.The resonance conductance (‘Bandyopadhyay coherence’ – ‘BC’) through tubulins and microtubules is consistentwiththe intra-tubulin aromatic ring pathways (Section3.3, Figs. 5–7) which can support Orch OR quantum dipoles,and in which anesthetics bind, apparently to selectively erase consciousness. Bandyopadhyay’s experiments do seemto provide clear evidence for coherent microtubule quantum states at brain temperature.4.6.  Beat frequenciesQuantum-coherent behavior does indeed appear to be relevant, in a way that applies even to biological systems,at surprisingly warm temperatures. Accordingly, we appear to need an extension of the DP proposal that can be usedin such ‘warm’ situations. Although such a theory is not yet at hand, it will be of some importance here to indicatecertain of the key issues, so that we can get a feeling for the role that we are requiring for DP-related ideas in thesuggested proposals put forward in the sections below.In the first place, it should be pointed out that in standard quantum treatments of systems at non-zero tempera-ture,the description would be in terms of adensity matrixrather than a simple wavefunction. Such a density-matrixdescription can be viewed as aprobability mixtureof different wavefunctions—although such an ontology does notreveal the full subtleties involved, since a single density matrix can be interpreted in many different ways as such aprobability mixture (see for example[114], Sections 29.4, 29.5). As yet, a fully appropriate generalization of the DPscheme to a density-matrix description has not been provided. But in any case it is unlikely that this would be anappropriate thing to do in the present context, and here we shall explore an alternative route to the understanding ofquantum effects in warm-temperature systems.
56S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78It is important to bear in mind that biological systems are very far from being in thermal equilibrium, so that acrude assignment of an overall ‘temperature’ to such a system is unlikely to be very revealing. Whenever we areasking for the manifestation of large-scale quantum effects in a warm system, we are not expecting that all the degreesof freedom should be simultaneously involved with these effects and therefore uniformly thermalized. What we reallyrequire is that certain of these degrees of freedom can be excited in ways that remain isolated from most of the others,and that these excited degrees can be maintained in some form of quantum oscillation that can preserve its quantumnature for an appreciable time, without dissipation, this time being long enough for the system to reach Orch ORthreshold, given byτ≈ ̄h/EG.In previous Orch OR publications, the relevant timeτforconscious moments (seeFig. 11) has been assumedto correlate with physiological EEG parameters, i.e. 10 to several hundred milliseconds, which is relatively long forisolated quantum systems. But here we suggest an alternative way in which such oscillation frequencies might comeabout, namely asbeatfrequencies, arising when OR is applied to superpositions of quantum states of slightly differentenergies. This makes the task of finding an origin for these observed frequencies far simpler and more plausible.In order to get some feeling of how the ideas of DP might relate to such situations, let us first address the assumptionofstationaritythat is involved in the DP scheme where, in order to apply DP strictly, we must consider that each ofthe states in superposition is to be regarded as being stationary, if taken on its own. In standard quantum mechanics,a stationary state is an eigenstate of energy—i.e. a state of definite energyE—which tells us that this quantum statehas a (complex) oscillatory nature with a time-dependence that is proportional to e−iEt/ ̄h(see, for example,[114],Chapter 21) so that it oscillates with frequencyE/h(where we recall thath=2π ̄h). If we have a stateΨwhich isa superposition of two slightly different statesΨ1andΨ2, each of which would be stationary on its own, but withvery slightly different respective energiesE1andE2, then the superposition would not be quite stationary. Its basicfrequency would be the average(E1+E2)/2hof the two, corresponding to the average energy12(E1+E2), but thiswould be modulated by a much lowerclassicalfrequency (‘beats’) that is the difference between the two, namely|E1−E2|/h, as follows, very roughly, from the following mathematical identity (where we may takea=−E1t/ ̄handb=−E2t/ ̄hto represent the quantum wavefunctions for the two energies):eia+eib=2ei(a+b)/2cosa−b2.If we imagine the complex oscillatory term eiato represent one quantum stateΨ1and eibto represent the other,then we see that their superposition has a complex quantum oscillation ei(a+b)/2, which has a frequency which is theaverage of the two, but this is modulated by a classical oscillation as given by the cosine term, with a much lowerfrequency determined by thedifferencebetween the quantum mechanical frequenciesE1andE2of the two individualstatesΨ1andΨ2. This classical ‘beat’ frequency is in fact|E1−E2|/hrather than|E1−E2|/2hbecause whenpassing from a quantum amplitude to a classical probability we need to take the squared modulus of the amplitude,and in this case it amounts to taking the squared modulus of half the right-hand side of the above expression, namelycos2{12(a−b)}={1+cos(a−b)}/2 for finding one component of the superposition and{1−cos(a−b)}/2fortheother. (This phenomenon is closely related to that found in neutrino oscillations, see[136].)To be more explicit about how this comes about, it is necessary to appreciate, first, that the eigenstates of en-ergy,Ψ1andΨ2, in the superposition—i.e. the two stationary states of which the quantum state is composed, insuperposition—will, in the situation under consideration, be different from the two distinguishablelocation statesΛandΠ(taken to be normalized and mutually orthogonal, and without any time-dependence) that would be the statesof location arising as a result of the OR process in the original DP proposal (which is concerned with the degeneratecase of equal energy eigenvalues) or as the two states between which (as we shall argue)classical oscillationtakesplace (in the case of unequal energy eigenvalues). We consider here the case of unequal energy eigenvalues, so theeigenstatesΨ1andΨ2must be distinct and orthogonal to each other, and we may assume that each is normalized.Accordingly, we can choose phases for the location-state basisΛ,Π, so thatΨ1andΨ2, when expressed in terms ofthese location states, take the formΨ1=(Λcosθ+Πsinθ)eiaandΨ2=(Λsinθ−Πcosθ)eibfor some angleθ(measuring the “angle” between the energy basis and the location basis), where the time-dependenceof these states is now provided bya=−E1t/ ̄handb=−E2t/ ̄h, as above. The initial quantum state is taken to be asuperposition
S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–7857Ψ=αΨ1+βΨ2,whereαandβare complex constants satisfying|α|2+|β|2=1. In terms of the location statesΛandΠ, we findΨ=Λ(αeiacosθ+βeibsinθ)+Π(αeiasinθ−βeibcosθ).To find the classical oscillation that this ought to reduce to, according to our extended DP proposal, we calculate (inaccordance with standard quantum mechanics) the time-dependent probabilities that a measurement to distinguishbetween the two location states would give us, this being obtained by taking the squared moduli of the coefficients ofΛandΠ, namely|α|2cos2θ+|β|2sin2θ+(αβei(a−b)+βαei(b−a))cosθsinθand|α|2sin2θ+|β|2cos2θ−(αβei(a−b)+βαei(b−a))sinθcosθrespectively. These two probabilities are seen to sum to 1, as they should, and provide us with a probability valuethat oscillates between the two locations (though perhaps preferentially with respect to one or the other, dependingon the parameters) with a frequency determined by|a−b|, namely “beat” difference frequency|E1−E2|/h,asasserted above. There is also a much higher quantum oscillation frequency which in particular cases (e.g.|α|=|β|andθ=π/4) we can identify as the average(E1+E2)/2hof the two constituent quantum frequencies, but where ingeneral this frequency is not so precisely defined, though can be thought of as being a quantity of this order of size.According to a (crude) direct application of DP, we might imagine that this ‘measurement’ (i.e. OR action) would bea spontaneous reduction to one or other of these two locations in a timescale of the general order ofτ≈ ̄h/EG(whereEGis the gravitational self-energy of the difference between the expectation values mass distributions of the twostates), but with much apparent randomness as to which of the two locations is taken up upon reduction. However, foran oscillating system like this, where the original quantum state is a superposition of two stationary states of slightlydifferent energiesE1andE2, and which therefore behaves as a state effectively undergoing aquantumoscillation withfrequency of around(E1+E2)/2hand aclassical“beat” oscillation of frequency|E1−E2|/h, it seems appropriatethat  we  adopt  this  suggestedextensionof  the  original  DP  proposal,  whereby  the  interfering  quantum  oscillationsreduce spontaneously to aclassical oscillationwhose frequency is the beat frequency, rather than it simply reducesto one location or the other in a seemingly random way that would then not clearly manifest this beat frequency. Wetake thetimefor the combined quantum oscillation of the state to reduce to beτ≈ ̄h/EG(on average), just as inthe original DP proposal, but we now take the reduction to be to a classical oscillation (with this beat frequency),rather than to one or the other of the original pair of states. It is thephaseof this oscillation that becomes definiteupon reduction (OR), rather than one or the other of the two locations being singled out. We note that in the limitingsituation, where we takeE1andE2to be identical, the beat period would become infinite, so that in such a situationthe reduction simply takes the state to one location or the other, in an average time of the order ofτ≈ ̄h/E1= ̄h/E2,just as in the original DP proposal.We  are  taking  it  thatτis  very  much  larger  than  the  quantum  oscillation  period∼2h/(E1+E2),  but  it  couldpresumably be a lot smaller than the ‘beats’ periodh/|E1−E2|. We must bear in mind that there will be a considerablespread in the actual times at which the reduction will take place (since, as we recall, the role ofτis really only asa kind of half-life for reduction), but here this only affects thephaseof the oscillation, the frequency itself beingsimply the well-defined beat frequency|E1−E2|/h. Accordingly, if we consider that our system consists of a largenumber of identical quantum superpositions of the same kind, then this beat frequency would become evident acrossthe system as a whole (as with an orchestra, with many violinists playing the same note, but not phase coherently).Thus, according to this extended DP proposal, we ought to see evidence of this difference frequency|E1−E2|/h,asa result of the OR process, which would be far lower than the exceedingly high individual frequenciesE1andE2, andthe oscillation periodh/|E1−E2|could be significantly longer thanτ.Thus, we may consider conscious moments to be Orch OR events occurring with beat frequencies|E1−E2|/h,rather than primary frequenciesE1/handE2/h. This makes the task far simpler and more plausible than it had beenwithin our earlier scheme. Quantum superpositions need avoid environmental decoherence only for a time that, whileconsiderably longer than the periods of the primary frequencies,E1andE2, might nevertheless be short comparedwith the time periodh/|E1−E2|of the beat frequencies|E1−E2|/h. Following Bandyopadhyay’s findings, these
58S. Hameroff, R. Penrose / Physics of Life Reviews 11 (2014) 39–78primary frequencies may be around 10 megahertz, with time periods of∼10−8s. Decoherence might need be avoidedfor a mere ten-millionth of a second with consciousness occurring at far slower beat frequencies. For example ifE1andE2were 10.000000 megahertz and 10.000040 megahertz respectively, a beat frequency of 40 Hz (by|E1−E2|/h)could correlate with discrete conscious moments.These  considerations  had  not  been  taken  into  account  in  our  simpler  earlier  viewpoint  that  the  frequencies  ofoscillationthat appear to be associated with conscious processes are the result of repeated occurrences of OR, and thatthe periods of oscillation are therefore to be identified with the value of tau itself, e.g. 25 milliseconds for 40 Hz gammasynchrony (Fig. 11). It must be borne in mind, in relation to this earlier proposal, thatτisonlyakindofaveragereduction time (like the half-life of a radioactive decay). On that basis, Orch OR events would occur at distinctlyirregular intervals, and could be only very roughly related to there quired overall ranges such as gamma synchrony(30 to 90 Hz) or other EEG frequency bands. It is a little difficult to see how this previous, provisional viewpoint couldgive rise to a fairly definite characteristic frequency of oscillation, like the 40 Hz gamma synchrony EEG.Nevertheless, for  the sake of  continuity with our earlier  discussions, we shall  also refer  to  this earlier  schemeconcurrentlywith our present ‘beat frequency’ point of view, but even this newer perspective must be considered astentative in various respects. It is to be expected that the actual mechanisms underlying the production of consciousnessin a human brain will be very much more sophisticated than any that we can put forward at the present time, and wouldbe likely to differ in many important respects from any that we would be in a position to anticipate in our currentproposals. Nevertheless, we do feel that the suggestions that we are putting forward here represent a serious attemptto grapple with the fundamental issues raised by the consciousness phenomenon, and it is in this spirit that we presentthem here